Population
==================

  France overtook Spain and Italy in terms of population by 1340.
  Population of Paris: 80,000
  Venice: 100,000
  Florence: 96,000

  Black Death killed one third.


  Increasing food production increases population, it also reduces
  the number working in agriculture, increasing urbanization,
  growing the economy.

  Literacy, technological progress, representative government,
  empires COULD contribute to economic growth.

  "The model explains five variables–the
population, the wage rate, urbanization, agricultural productivity, and the proto-industrial
revolution"

	On Belgium and England:
	"Rising agricultural efficiency
contributed to economic development by providing food, wool, and flax to support the
nonagricultural economy, by releasing labour for manufacturing employment, and by providing
a surplus that could finance investment or sustain the conspicuous consumption of the
aristocracy and state"

	On the five variables mention above being reinforcing:
	"Higher urbanization, for instance, led to higher agricultural productivity. Causation
worked in the opposite way as well with higher agricultural productivity increasing the share of
the population living in cities"

The view of development is, thus, one in which living
standards, urbanization, proto-industrialization, and agricultural revolutions were mutually
reinforcing. Neither was a prime mover pushing all of the others forward. Other prime movers include the literacy rate,
a productivity variable indexing the growth of competitive advantage in the new draperies,
previous levels of urbanization, the land-labour ratio.

  Land-labour ratio
  dividing agricultural land by the population gives the land-labour ratio T/L.


  Intercontinental trade
  Some countries were successful in the race for empire, while others were not. Spain
seized a vast empire in Latin America and the Phillippines, England acquired much of north
America, some rich sugar islands in the Carribean, and Bengal, the Netherlands conquered
Indonesia, the original Spice Islands and Surinam, and France had important possessions in
North America, the Carribean, and India. Portugal had a substantial empire in Brazil, Africa,
and South Asia but is not in the data base analyzed here. The other European countries were not
in the running.
The effect of empires is measured by TRADEPOP, the volume of nonspecie trade per
capita.
10
All of the countries were mercantilist and tried to reserve trade with their colonies for
their nationals. The experience of the Dutch is the exception that proves the rule. They were
highly efficient in shipping and the closest to free traders in the Atlantic economy (but not in the
Asian). However, the Dutch were squeezed out of most Atlantic colonial trade by the
regulations of the English, French, and Spanish. Only in times of war could the Dutch make
much headway (De Vries and van der Woude 1997, pp. 476-9). Many factors affect trade
volumes, but the experience of the Dutch shows the primary of politics in this period, which is
why trade is treated as an exogenous measure of imperial advantage.
It should be noted that trade volumes are measured exclusive of shipments of gold and
silver. This affects the measurement of Spanish trade where bullion was the main cargo. While
the Dutch and, especially, the English empires offered trade and markets, the Spanish may have
been too successful in generating loot: The gold and silver from the American inflated prices and
wages in Spain rendering much manufacturing unprofitable (Hamilton 1934, 1936, 1947,
Dreilichman 2002). The effects of the Spanish empire are tested in some specifications by
including a dummy variable SPANEMP

  see: http://www.nuffield.ox.ac.uk/users/allen/povprog3NEW.pdf

  States in Northern Europe have greater potential for food production
  as we see in this period, Southern states populations and urbanizations
  decline. see http://i451.photobucket.com/albums/qq235/guaporense/30largestcitieseurope.png



   In Western Europe the aggregate rate of urbanization gradually increased from 5.8% in 1500 to 10.2% in 1800.

	"while in England the proportion of the population working in agriculture fell from 74% to 43% over the same period, in Italy and Spain, the proportions didn't change at all. Reflecting a tendency towards stagnating incomes in these regions
	source: http://historum.com/european-history/44491-economic-growth-early-modern-europe.html
	 

	 
		Notes on taxation. Source: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G0R09YzyuCI&feature=youtu.be

		The Romans went from living off "interest" which was living off agricultural production,
		to living off "capital" which was the land and the peasants themselves due to 
		exceptionally high tax rate.

		How is this disparity defined? How much tax is too much tax?

		They also tried to sustain themselves by debasing the denarii(originally 99% pure silver)
		went down to almost 0%, it was a long slippery road.



		

		Silver, Food, Order, Trade Items, Innovation


		Complexity(Produces order requires silver)

		Urbanization(Produces trade items requires food)

		Agriculture(Produces food requires innovation)

